As previously mentioned, we're going to start with EHR data set levels.
In this part, there are three levels;
line, encounter, and longitudinal.
These levels are extremely important in healthcare data,
and being able to identify and work with data at
the correct level will ensure that you start with the correct data type and dataset.
EHR records are commonly represented at one of three levels.
First is the line level.
The line level is really
a de-normalized representation of all
of the things that might happen in the medical visit or encounter.
Think of a visit to the doctor for bronchitis,
and a line could be a diagnosis or medication that was prescribed.
Another line could include information on a lab tests
that the doctor ordered for informing the diagnosis.
The next level, the encounter level or visit level is
the aggregated information from
the previously mentioned line level that can be collapsed into a single row of arrays.
As mentioned earlier, it can be thought of as a doctor's visit,
or hospital stay, or other medical encounter.
We will go into more detail on how this actually looks later.
The final level is the longitudinal level or patient level view.
It is an important level because it aggregates the patient history and can show
how the culmination of visits/encounters lead to some clinical impact.
Let's take another look at how the levels
connect in a different view of these relationships.
As we just went over,
EHR records are commonly represented at one of the following levels,
line encounter, and longitudinal levels.
Starting at the most granular level,
the line level is really a de-normalized representation of
all the things that might happen in a medical visit or encounter.
The line level includes; diagnosis codes,
medication codes, procedure codes,
and also possibly lab codes as well.
The encounter or visit level is the aggregated information from
the previously mentioned line level that can be collapsed into a single row of arrays.
This level takes the diagnosis,
procedures, and medications and combines them into the visit.
Lastly, this brings us to longitudinal level or patient-level view.
This view is an important level for aggregating the patient history,
and is where you connect information across the visits and encounters,
and roll it up into information to determine trends across time.
Why is it important to know what level your dataset is?
From my experience, this can lead to major errors with
building models because data preparation was done with faulty assumptions.
There are a few ways where miss identification of the level can lead to serious errors.
For example, a common case is duplication of encounter information.
Duplication of encounter information can incur when you take
a line level dataset and treat it as an encounter level dataset.
So for example, a particular encounter might have 50 lines,
and that might be treated inadvertently
as 50 distinct encounters when it's actually just wanting counter.
This has the effect of up sample in
certain common values for that encounter in your dataset,
and also create a great deal of noise since
those 50 lines and the example might have some other slight differences.
Another reason why EHR levels are important is
that you can select the wrong encounter from the patient record.
This might occur where you only want
the earliest or latest visit for a patient for your model.
This can cause a plethora of issues that might not
become apparent into modeling or deployment phases of your project.
So how do you know which level you are at?
First, you must collect a few key stats to inform what's level you're at.
One thing you can collect is the total number of rows in the dataset.
This is a simple calculation,
and the number of unique encounters or visits.
You can calculate this by finding the field or
fields that give the identity of a unique encounter.
From there, you can easily diagnose if a dataset is that the line or encounter level.
In general, you can easily ascertain this by doing the following test.
For the line level,
you will see that the total number of rows is
greater than the number of unique encounters.
For the encounter level,
you'll see that the total number of rows is equal to the number of unique encounters.
This is usually an indication that the lines are collapsed or aggregated at
the encounter level with usually some arrays aggregated for each unique encounter ID.
For longitudinal or patient level,
you will see multiple encounters grouped under a patient,
and you might not even see the encounter ID field since
this information is collapsed or aggregated under a unique patient ID.
Now you should have a good handle on dataset levels.